Add tracepoints-and-monitoring-the-bitcoin-network review to chaincode-labs/chaincode-podcast (#471)
bitcointranscripts/bitcointranscripts: chaincode-labs/chaincode-podcast/tracepoints-and-monitoring-the-bitcoin-network.md

## Monitoring Mining pools

Adam Jonas: 00:04:27

So as you do these monitoring projects, and you did, you started with mempool, but that morphed into mining pool as well.
So why mining pool?
Why is that an interesting difference?

0xB10C: 00:04:37

One key property of Bitcoin is this interstitial resistance.
And we were fine as long as one mining pool says, okay, I don’t mine one transaction.
I don’t allow this transaction to be included in my block.
We’re fine.
But once we see multiple pools doing that, or all pools doing that, blocking or filtering certain transactions, then this property of Bitcoin doesn’t hold anymore.
And I think that’s really important for us to know if that happens and maybe to react to that if we can, if we even can.

Adam Jonas: 00:05:06

I’m sure there are shenanigans happening.
So like, how do you raise the flag or how do you call that to the community’s attention?
Or is that our job?

0xB10C: 00:05:15

Well, yeah, I like I built the tool and if I observe something I would raise a flag.
I don’t know, I would tweet about it, I would blog about it.

## Mining pools not mining P2TR at Taproot activation

Mark Erhardt: 00:05:23

I mean that works, right?

> Looking at the taproot activation, your mining pool observer picked up that some mining pools were not mining paid to Taproot transactions, even though it was active at that point.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Looking at the taproot activation, your mining pool observer picked up that some mining pools were not mining pay-to-Taproot transactions, even though it was active at that point.
```

Yeah.
And yeah, that definitely got seen.

Adam Jonas: 00:05:38

And that was some of it by accident, right?

0xB10C: 00:05:40

Correct.
Yeah.

Adam Jonas: 00:05:42

Tell us that story.

0xB10C: 00:05:43

Yeah.
So actually I was running like a live stream up on Taproot activation.
Activation is always interesting.
There might be stuff happening that we didn’t foresee, but we should have.
We hope that everything goes smooth, but sometimes stuff happens.
In the very night of Taproot activation, actually early morning for me, Taproot activated and we saw a lot of people broadcasting their first Taproot spends into the mempool, including up-to-time messengers saying I’m the first one to spend Taproot, for example.
Then the first block arrived, didn’t include any Taproot spend.
These high-fee mempool transactions not included.
So we started, okay, is there anything wrong with our code?
Is there anything we didn’t test?
Then the second block arrived.

Adam Jonas: 00:06:24

> Because you had done a, was it with the F2 pool?

Reviewer: You can see a couple of lines below that "F2Pool" is the correct
```suggestion
Because you had done a, was it with the F2Pool?
```

And it later turned out that these pools had upgraded in time, burned for signaling, but the issue was that their peers were old and they had some weird manual peer configuration, which then caused problems for them.
Their peers couldn’t relay these pay-to-type-root spans because they are non-standard for them.

Mark Erhardt: 00:07:34

So basically they were up to date and ready to go and actually correctly signaling, but just didn’t see the Taproot transactions because their peers filtered them out and dropped them as nonstandard.
Correct.

0xB10C: 00:07:45

Yeah.

Adam Jonas: 00:07:46

So what was remediation for that?
You chat with them, you figure it out.
They change their peers and then off and running?

0xB10C: 00:07:53

Yeah, they had some custom code and I think they dropped that.
I think they now keep more closely to the Bitcoin core releases than before.
And then after a few weeks, the AMP pool took a bit longer.
We don’t know exactly because the communication was a bit more difficult, but we know, they know my page attack would span just as all other pools are.

Adam Jonas: 00:08:13

Cool.
And so, I mean, this is the service that you provide to the community.

> Correct.

Reviewer: This "Correct" line here was mistakenly attributed to Jonas. We expect from reviewers to catch those

We don’t have that in our block template.
Some other times we for example see the payouts and consideration transactions from pools which they sometimes include via a zero fee payment.
So they don’t specify any fees, they are not related on the network and we can detect them being included there.
And of course transaction accelerators for example ERPTC runs a transaction accelerator, you pay an out-of-band fee and they include your low fee transaction really early on in their block and we can see that for example.

Mark Erhardt: 00:10:32

So you would say that generally you see all the mining pools you’re observing as using the same block building as Bitcoin Core?
Yes.
But they sometimes prioritize transactions because of out of band or their own usage.

0xB10C: 00:10:45

Yeah, I think they use the ERPC prioritized transaction.

Mark Erhardt: 00:10:49

So it’s consistent with Bitcoin Core being run by all of them?

0xB10C: 00:10:53

Yeah, I think so.
And we don’t see too much deviation from the block template actually.
Right.

Adam Jonas: 00:10:59

Well, that’s Maybe more fodder for why, Mark, you should be continuing to work on that project.

> Yeah, I know.

Reviewer: Another false attribution

## User-space Statically Defined Tracing (USDT)

Adam Jonas: 00:11:06

Cool.

> One of the other projects you’ve been working on is adding trace points to Bitcoin Core.

Reviewer: The correct word "tracepoints" instead of "trace points" is on the title of the transcript, making it easier to catch and fix those.
```suggestion
One of the other projects you’ve been working on is adding tracepoints to Bitcoin Core.
```

0xB10C: 00:19:00

Yeah, right.
Actually, the address flooding that happened last summer actually was one of the motivations for that project.
So one goal is actually to take some of the address flooding or similar flooding or anything in that direction and have an alert because I think, at least from my perspective, I was not directly involved in that.
But from my perspective, this was just a coincidence that we actually saw that happening on the network and might be valuable for us to know something like that.

Adam Jonas: 00:19:28

Yeah, it was, I think It was raised to GMAX’s attention on a BitcoinTalk forum, which then got relayed to more active folks.
But without someone combing BitcoinTalk forum, it wouldn’t necessarily…

0xB10C: 00:19:43

In the end, there was a paper about it, and so it definitely got attention.
But I think it could have happened that nobody reported it or the core development process, people involved in that never heard about it.

Mark Erhardt: 00:19:55

Yeah.
Making peer-to-peer traffic more readable and more accessible to regular users would maybe enable more of that to come to attention.

0xB10C: 00:20:04

> Yeah, and there are different attacks on the PTP networks.

Reviewer: This is the type of AI transcription mistakes that we expect from our reviewers to catch.
```suggestion
Yeah, and there are different attacks on the P2P networks.
```
